Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
to the MJ by Doctor Scott Hershowitz. He's the
Thomas G. AND Mabel Long Professor of Law and
Professor of philosophy at the University of Michigan. And
today we're talking about his book Law is a
Moral Practice. So Doctor Hershowitz, welcome to the show.
It's a pleasure to everyone. Yeah,
thanks so much for having me.
So let's start perhaps with a few definitions here.
So first of all, what is a rule? What
counts as a rule?
What counts as a rule? Yes. Oh, you know,
I, um, Uh, it's, it's, you know, it's, it's
a, it's a funny question cause it's a hard
question to answer. Um, NOTWITHSTANDING the fact that everyone
knows what rules are, we're familiar with lots of
examples, we're familiar with the speed limit, or, you
know, you have to wear shoes to go in
to the restaurant. Um, SO I think maybe the,
the simplest. The answer you might give is it's
a norm of general application, right? That it's um
sets a standard that applies um uh to many
instances of the same activity. So it's not, so,
so later, right? I will go pick up my
son at 1:55. Uh, WHEN he's done taking his,
uh, his high school exam today, I, it's not,
I, there's no rule that I do so, um,
because that's the thing that's happening today and not
other days. Um, uh, BUT, but so when we've
got norms, um, that, that have generality, we tend
to think of them, and generality and, um, uh,
uh, we tend to think of them as being,
uh, at least in the ballpark of rules.
Right. And what is law then?
Yeah, so, um, you know, there's a debate about
what law is that goes back, um, hundreds or
really thousands of years, um, and the book that
we're talking about laws and moral practice is, um,
Uh, an effort to, uh, reframe how people understand
and think about that question, and invite people actually
to recognize that there's many different ways that we
talk about law and many things that we might
mean by law, and then to zoom in on
something specific that I think is neglected and often
misunderstood. So let me not give you like the
whole history of thousands of years of debate, but
let me sort of start in the mid-20th century.
When HLA Hart, who was uh the professor of
jurisprudence at Oxford, um, published a book called The
Concept of Law, which argues that law is a
set of rules and not just any set of
rules, a set of rules that have a particular
structure. He distinguished different kinds of rules and he
thought there was a particular kind of rule that
sat at the foundation of a legal system called
the rule of recognition, and it picked out other
rules that would be part of the system. Um,
HEART, right, um, it's just one very famous instance
of somebody who thinks of law as a kind
of Domain of normativity. It's a collection of rules
brought into being by our social activities. There's other
versions of views like this. So before Hart, John
Austin said that law was a set of commands,
right? After Hart, Scott Shapiro says that law is
not rules, it's a set of plans, right? Um,
BUT what all of those folks have in common
is they think of there being, um, Uh, our,
our legal activities are generating some new domain of
normativity, right? Um, AND that law is the stuff
is the stuff that's in there. And I want
to invite people to think about law differently, right?
Not that our legal activities are bringing into being
this normative system that didn't exist before, but rather
to understand our legal activities as things we do
to adjust our moral relationship. So here's an analogy,
right? So I promised you that I would join
up to this, uh, to this video chat at
uh at 11 a.m. my time, uh, today, right?
And before we made that agreement by email, I
didn't have any obligation to sit down at my
computer and, you know, turn it on and click
on the link you sent me and join you
for this conversation. But after you asked, you asked
and I said, yes, that sounds great. I'll be
there. I acquired this new obligation. I think it's
a matter of morality. And what I want people
invite what I want to invite people to do
is to think of our legal activities as practices
like promising. I call them moral practices. Practices that
are intended to adjust are moral relationships, and to
think of legal. Claims as being a species of
moral claim. So when I go to court and
I say, hey, Ricardo, you owe me compensation for
this injury inflicted, right? The Harian story or the
Scott Shapiro story is to test the truth of
that claim, we look to this normative system that
was created out of our legal activities, where my
view is, ah, I've made a moral claim. I've
said you owe me something. And the question is
what could make that true? And the answer might
depend on, you know, facts about the political history,
the legal history of our community, but I want
people to see law as something we do as
part of our moral lives, not as something that's
separate from it.
And where do laws come from? How are they
developed? Can we say that they are invented or
not?
Yeah, so, um, the folks who hold the kind
of positive side of the picture, right? Hart and
Shapiro, and Austin, and many others, um, one way
in which they try and capture the idea is
they, they think of law as an artifact, right?
It's something that human beings. Things have made and
let's look at see what the social practices are
that make law and try and understand the social
social practices between the, the, the, how to understand
the connections between those social practices and law um
and I'm inviting people to try out a different
way of understanding it. Right? Because, right, we also
make morality, and I feel like that's a neglected
aspect of this conversation. Um, IN some ways I
feel like the book is as much trying to
say something about morality as it is about law.
So what do I mean when we say we
make morality? We'll take that example I just gave
you. I, um, made a promise to you and
brought into being this new kind of obligation that
I would meet you here. Or maybe, um, uh,
you know, I, uh, my, my younger son wanted
to go to the pool last night, and You
know, I told him, you know, when he had
to be home, right? And if, if I'm right
in thinking that I have the kind of moral
authority, um, to set the conditions of when he
can when he can go and when he must
come back, then my saying so created for him
this obligation. Um, YOU know, either, you know, in
our house, disjunctive, either be home by 7 o'clock
or text me and ask me for permission to
stay longer. Let me know that you want to,
right? Um, BUT, uh, but, but it turns out,
right, that that that to say that something's an
artifact doesn't necessarily mean to say, right, that it's
not a part of morality, right? Because we make
moral obligations too. And so I think Right, one
thing I share in common with positivist folks is,
right, I think that we make law, right, through
our legal activities, but I think that that's, that's
something that we're doing as part of our moral
lives, not something that we're doing separate from our
moral lives.
And why do we grant authority to certain people
to create and enforce laws?
Um, SO I think that we face, um, a
variety of challenges. Challenges, you know, like there's lots
of things I agree with people who work in
the positivist tradition about. Um, SO, um, so let
me, you know, highlight some of that agreement. Hart
was particularly focused on, um, conflicts, uh, that we
might have about what he Called the primary rules,
rules of obligation, rules of duty, right? So, um,
who has to pay for the upkeep of our
fence or when can I go on your land
or if we disagree about whose land it is,
how do we decide, right? And so hard thought
communities that um Uh, you know, they, they faced
kinds of problems and coordinating on what the rules
were that they would live by, right? So they
faced challenges in identifying what the rules were at
all. They might face challenges in applying rules, they
might face um challenges in enforcing rules, and so
he thought our legal practices were going to provide
answers if we could create a new set of
socially determined rules. Right about which we could have
um at least some clarity and rules for adjudicating
our disputes and rules for creating new rules, um,
and rules for recognizing the rules we've already got
that we would get ourselves out of some of
these problems, right? I think one reason, right, we
confer authority on some legal actors is something like
that story, right, which is to say, um. You
know, we have fights about what our rights and
responsibilities are. Um, SOMETIMES it's really helpful to have
third parties that can resolve those disputes. And if
you look at pre-legal societies, I have a colleague,
Bill Miller, who studies, um, Lots of um honor
cultures, right? AND describes a cars the character of
the odd man. The odd man is a third
party, right? You've got two people who are at
odds, they're gonna get the odd man, he's gonna
tell them how to get even, right? Um, AND,
you know, a lot of our institutionalized practice. Practices
of adjudication are, are just more developed, more formalized
versions of that. So, so one answer is conflict,
right? Another answer is um coordination. We can accomplish
a lot together, right? That we can't accomplish on
our own. Right, so if we create um uh
institutions that raise taxes and um and have organizational
capacity, they can build roads and, you know, stand
up armies and build rocket ships that take us
to space. All of these reasons are also all
of the Like you know, these like capacity building
coordination reasons are also good reasons to have legal
institutions. Um, AND we could, we could continue on
with that. But, um, you know, there, but like
the more general answer is they're solving interpersonal problems
we have and then also helping us to extend
beyond our individual capacities.
And where do you think the idea that law
and morality are two completely separate things stems from
and uh and why, why does it seem to
be so popular among particularly legal scholars and legal
practitioners?
Uh, SO I think it's actually super easy to
understand. The law can be awful, just really, um,
Um, terribly dreadful. And so here's a simple explanation
for that, right? And, and actually let's, before we
even do a simple explanation, let's just like notice
some of the ways in which law can be
awful, right? So I live in a country in
the moment in which people are being, you know,
pulled off the streets and, um, and locked up.
And deported, um, uh, you know, um, uh, unpredictably
and for no good reason with alarming frequency, or
for a long time, uh, in the common law
legal world, um, a man was not considered legally
capable of raping his wife. Or, right, well, you
know, or we can just do lots of wars.
You find me a legal system and I will
find you um uh things that are absolutely awful
about the legal practices in our community. And this
draws people to think, I think quite understandably, and
I'm tempted to think this way sometimes. Oh, this
must mean that law is something different than morality,
right? Why? Because, well, morality, right, will, will, um,
like, not morality in the sense of like what
people's beliefs about morality happen to be, but actual
morality, whatever it is, whatever we're struggling to grasp,
that will turn out to be a good thing
and law is so often not, right? So, um,
Lots of people think that law just must be
separate from morality. I think there's clear senses in
which that's true. And one of the things I
try to do in laws and moral practices highlight
the different ways that we talk about law and
to notice the similarities actually with the different ways
that we talk about morality. So I just drew
a distinction between um What people think about morality,
and what morality actually is. Sometimes people draw a
distinction between, say, social morality and critical morality to
capture that. Um, TO capture that difference, right? So
I can ask a question, for instance, like, what's
the morality of bond traders or, you know, what
is, um, you know, what's the morality of, um,
you know, ICE agents or what have you, where
what I'm trying to understand is how do they
think about the world, what do they take their
rights and responsibilities to be, and having that kind
of sociological conversation. I'm not saying that I think
bond traders have the proper view of their rights
and responsibilities. I'm not saying I think ICE agents
behave well, right? I'm just trying to understand the
kind of um uh social feature of the world.
People have views about morality that they act on,
right? I think the same is true of law.
I can approach it sociologically, and I can ask,
right, what do people around here take their rights
and responsibilities to be and how do they carry
on, right? But I could also do the other
thing, right? I could ask, what are their rights
and responsibilities actually in light of their legal practices.
And I think it's very important to do both.
I think it's actually very important for a lawyer
to be able to do both, to wear both
hats, to be able to say, oh I'm gonna
go to court, I better understand how judges and
other lawyers think about the question. That I am
arguing about, but I also have to think about
what I think the right answer is, right? And
that may not just be a function of how
other people think about it in the same way
that when I have an argument with a bond
trader, you know, at, uh, um, you know, at
a bar, right? I might be interested in what
he thinks, but also in telling him I think
he has it wrong.
And why should we care whether law is a
moral practice or not?
Um, SO I am of two minds about this,
right? One is, I've got a kind of deflationary
view about the philosophical endeavor, which is to say,
if you're a lawyer out there every day during
your job, I don't think you have to worry
about the philosophy of law that much. I think
it's lurking in the background. I think occasionally you
bump up against it. Um, I think more frequently
when things are breaking as they are in the
United States right now, you bump up against philosophical
questions, but in your day to day work, I
don't think you have to worry about whether law
is a moral practice. Having said that, or whether
positivism is true or any of these other theses.
Having said that, Um, I do think that there
are reasons that I want to encourage people to
see, see things this way, um, and that I
want to talk to my students about this, and
let me highlight two for you. One is, I
think we'll understand ourselves better if we see the
way that law is a Part of our moral
lives and uh in at least two ways we'll
understand the significance that we accord law, um, that
we often treat in our everyday interactions, um, uh,
conclusions about legal rights and responsibilities as simply settling
what we ought to do. And this would be
puzzling, I think, if law was, um, uh, you
know, purely uh a social creation and, and not
connected, um, to morality. It's not that it couldn't
be explained, but I think it would be puzzling.
A second way in which it might help us
understand ourselves better is we have really deep disagreements,
not just about what the law should be, but
about what the law is. And that's puzzling on
the kind of positivist picture that law is um
purely a social creation, right? Because if their circumstances,
Ronald Workin was fond of observing this. There are
circumstances where we agree on what the social facts
are, what the statute says, what the previous decisions
say, and we still disagree about what law they've
created and um I. The the sort of picture
that law is like our legal practices are an
attempt to influence our moral obligations, has a nice
explanation of why we have these kinds of disagreements,
which starts from the thought that well we have
different moral, we have lots of moral disagreements, we
have different moral pictures, different ways of understanding our
background, rights and responsibilities, and so when we have
legal practices, we're also gonna understand how those background
rights and responsibilities have been shifted. Differently. So that's
one class of answers. I think that um this
can help us understand ourselves better. Second, kind of
more oriented towards what I want to say to
lawyers, what I wanna say to students, what I
try to say in the last chapter of laws
and moral practice is that um. I think it's
tempting for lots of lawyers when they take this
approach to thinking about law that they think it's
a separate normative system that has, you know, no
necessary connections to law and morality and Hart's famous
phrase, um, to kind of let themselves off the
hook, right? And to think, oh, like I'm just
doing law here, and yeah, I see that what
I'm doing is morally awful, or I see that
it's. Having terrible impacts, but my job is just
to do law, right? Um, AND, uh, again, you
could hold a positivist picture, right? Joseph Roz very
famously wrote an article called Judges are Humans too,
where the whole point was, judges aren't just subject
to the norms of law, they're subject to the
norms of morality. So I don't think there's anything,
I don't think that like my positivist friends, right?
Can't say to people, hey, you should, um, care
about your moral responsibilities. I just think I observed
lots of people in the world, let themselves off
the hook for bad behavior by imagining that they're
doing something that's called law and not morality, and
it's other people's jobs to worry about morality. And
I want to say to lawyers, no, no, no,
if you properly understand what law is, it's a
part of your moral life. You are part of
this moral practice. This, this moral endeavor, it only
makes a difference to us because of its connections
um to morality. And so I want to educate
them, educate lawyers differently, not to think of themselves
as the high priests and priestesses of, you know,
uh, something that's wholly different from morality, but to
see themselves as engaged in, in a, in a
fundamentally moral endeavor.
When lawyers argue in court, what do they argue
about?
Um, WELL, they can argue about lots of things,
right? Um, THEY can argue about facts, right, about,
you know, you know, was Ricardo there when the
gun was fired or was Ricardo not there when
the gun was fired and then they, you know,
point to the evidence that's been gathered in the
investigation or in discovery, right? They also argue about.
Law, right? And here are two different ways of
thinking about what it means to argue about law.
There's the picture that I'm pushing against, which says,
ah, what's happened in legislatures and courts and administrative
agencies in the past has created this special set
of rules or plans, that's the law, and we're
all trying to figure out what's in that special
set that applies to this case. Right? That's picture
number 1. Picture number 2, the picture I'm urging
is, well, somebody has come to court, you know,
in a civil suit, say a plaintiff, and they've
said, I have a right, and I think it's
a right, typically, I'm my home is tort law,
right? So in tort law, right, it's a right
with a kind of complicated structure. They say I
have a right to have the court enforce. A
right to compensation against this defendant. This defendant wronged
me. I have a right to compensation from them,
but not just that, I have a right to
have a court order that person to pay me
money. Right? And so I think the question that
that's being argued about is, is that true? Does
this person have that right? Um, AND I, you
know, the answer I think is not to be
found, right, in Kant or Aristotle or Mil or
in any like work of philosophy because they're at
too high level of an abstraction, right? The things
that we say and do and Our lives, the
things that we say and do in legislatures and
courts, they shape what rights we have in much
the same way that practices like promising and issuing
orders shape what rights we have. And so I
think when you go to court, we're asking a
moral question, does this person have that right against
a very complicated um social background?
But which kinds of moral questions are contested in
court?
Um, SO, um, Uh, so that's a good question
because there's lots of aspects of our moral lives
that won't surface in court, right? Um, IF my
friend is rude to me, you know, they're scrolling
their phone while I'm trying to tell them something
important, I'm not going to sue them, right? And
if I do sue them, my claim will be
dismissed, the court will say, um, uh, you failed
to state a claim, uh, Because there's no cause
of action, right? I'm not authorized. Even if, even
if my person, even if my friend owes me
something, right? They owe me an apology. Maybe they
owe me, you know, another opportunity to go out
and have a drink and have a good conversation.
So they don't just owe me an apology, they
owe me some kind of compensation if they, they
want to stay in good standing as friends. That's
not something I can enforce in court. Right, so,
um, I tend to think of, um, when we're
thinking about law as a part of morality, I
tend to think Um, in the way that Ronald
Orin suggested, we, uh, we think in the very
last book he wrote that, um, that law is
picking out or or or sort of like when
we talk about legal rights, let's say, that modifier
legal is picking out a a special subset of
our ordinary moral rights. It's rights that we're entitled
to enforce through legal institutions like courts or administrative
agencies. That's why I said a tort suit has
this kind of complicated structure. It's not just hey
you owe me money, right? It's, it's you owe
me money, and in a way for a reason
that I can demand that these legal institutions tell
you to pay me. Right? And so then it's
like an interesting question. Why do we make some
of our rights enforceable through these institutions and others
we just leave to informal negotiation, right? You know,
among acquaintances or among friends. And I think the
answer there is because there's a kind of Constant
trade-off to be made. Legal institutions are expensive. They
um are clumsy, they are time consuming, um, they
can be really disruptive to people's lives, um, and
so, um, I. You know, we're not gonna use
them for really trivial things like you were scrolling
through your phone or you were a few minutes
late when we said we had lunch. We're going
to use them for the most part, when there's
been really serious breaches of of um. Of morality
or really serious um injuries, um, but not just
that actually, right? Um, ALSO, right, really serious problems,
but really serious problems that courts can remedy. Because,
for instance, right, like, you know, your friend betraying
you, right, in some more substantive way, let's say,
than scrolling on your phone might be a really
serious moral breach. It's really hard for courts to
patch up friendships, right? Um, YOU know, the tools
they have in their kit, you know, pay money,
right? Don't work as well. So they can patch
up commercial relationships, much better they can patch up
friendships. Um, SO we use them where it's worth
using them, and we use them um when they
might be helpful.
Does the law hold the answer to all legal
questions?
questions? Um, SO, um, You know, there there's this,
uh, there's this kind of debate, especially on the,
um, well, this is kind of debate among philosophers
of law, right, as to, um, As to um
uh whether the law is ever indeterminate. So think
of a legal question, right? Or think of a
legal claim. I say I have a right, right,
a right against Ricardo. Ricardo owes me, I don't
know, $100,000 right? Um, AND, and here are at
least two possibilities. My claim could be true. Right,
my claim could be false, right? And then there's
like there's a question, is there a third possibility?
Could it be neither true nor false, right? That
I have a right to $100,000 from Ricardo, as
a legal matter? Could it be neither true nor
false? And then there's a downstream question from that.
If you think the answer is yes, it could
be neither true nor false, then um then what
should be done about it? Right, um, and, uh,
you know, one phase of the argument, say, between
Hart and Dworin was about just this question. Hart
thought that the law could be indeterminate because it
might turn out to be that that there was
no rule in the set. Of rules that counted
as the law that applied to a particular kind
of case or a particular kind of question. It
would just be legally unregulated. There would be no
answer and Hart thought, what's gonna happen in cases
like that if courts nevertheless have to provide an
answer is they'll create one. And depending on the
rules about the creation of new norms, they're creating
an answer might mean that there is now a
rule going forward, that might be how precedent works,
right? But Hart thought that there was significant indeterminacy,
um, and, uh, and necessarily so, he argues in
the concept of law. And Dwarkin famously defended, um,
uh, not quite the opposite view, but close to
the opposite view. He argued that there was always
a right answer. Right, that, um, that somebody has
come to court and they say they have a
right, and either they do have the right or
they don't have a right, right? And he observed
that courts never, never, right, throw up their hands
and say, ah, there's just no answer to this
question. They answer the question, right? And somebody who's
defending the, the hardy and the positivist kind of
picture will say, oh yeah, they answer it, but
they know there's no really no answer, right? They
just don't want to say that cause it would
undermine their authority. So they have explanations of why
courts don't say there's no answer. And working for
his part, you know, if you got him in
a quiet moment, he might say, could I imagine
a case where, like, the arguments were exactly tied,
right? You know, like they had equal weight on
both sides. He's like, I guess I can imagine
it, but it seems to me so incredibly unlikely
that if I thought that I was in that
position of equipoise in the arguments, I would think
I should go back and do more homework and
keep going to try and figure out if one
of these sides has the, has the better argument
than the other, right? I think of one of
Dwarkin's great contributions to legal philosophy, but contributions generally,
was to remind people that. The fact that it's
hard to answer a question does not mean that
there's no answer. The fact that we disagree about,
um, the answer to a question does not mean
that there's no answer. In fact, he said, the
fact that we disagree and it's hard and we
keep going, tells you that we're presupposing that there
is an answer, right? Maybe we're Wrong, right? But
he wanted people to understand that indeterminacy is not
a kind of default position that we argue ourselves
out of. It's as much a conclusion, right, as,
uh, you know, there is no answer is as
much a conclusion as Ricardo wins or Ricardo loses.
It needs an argument in its favor, and he
thought it was very unlikely to be there.
And what is natural law?
Yeah, it's a phrase I like to avoid because
it has meant lots of different things to lots
of different people at lots of points in history.
So let me in a very kind of crude
way. Distinguish um two ways of thinking about natural
law, right? So one way of thinking about natural
law says, oh look, there's this, there's this like
realm of legal rights and obligations that human beings
haven't created and our job is to use the
power of our minds to ascertain. Um, TO ascertain
what's in that set, and then, you know, uh,
some people would append to that thought that positive
law, the law made by human beings, is valid
only insofar as it matches up with what's in
the natural law, right? And a lot of the
early positivists set themselves in opposition to that kind
of picture. Right, so, you know, an old natural
law slogan might have been an unjust law is
not a law where the thought was, you know,
oh look, an unjust um posited law is not
gonna count as like a full-blooded enforceable law, right?
Um, YOU know, sometimes people want to lump folks
like Twin or me or Mark Greenberg is another
contemporary anti-positivist. In with a tradition like that, and
I don't think we fit very well, which is
one reason that I want to um avoid the
term, right? Because what we're saying is not that
there's um this, you know, Like set of secret
books somewhere that tell you like, you know, what
the laws of the universe are or what God's
law is, and that human law has to match
up to it. What what we're saying is that
um I I We engage in legal practices, um,
in part, right, to adjust our moral relationships and
the question what rights and obligations we have is
best understood as a kind of moral question, um,
but as I was discussing earlier, that doesn't mean
that human beings aren't making legal rights and obligations.
We're doing it in the same way that we
make promissory rights and obligations. Um, SO, uh, you
know, I feel like it's some misleading to, to,
um, or it's confusing, right, to take this phrase
natural law and try to apply it to two
really such different, such different views, um. But it's
also true, and I try to say this a
little bit at the explain this a little bit
at the end of law, is a moral practice
that um that um that lots of possivists will
turn out to count as natural lawyers on some
ways that the phrase has been understood as well,
right? So I mentioned Joseph Roz, right, who insisted
that um That uh the judges are people too.
They're subject to morality and in fact he thought
they should look to law to resolve cases because
sometimes that's their moral responsibility, right? So if all
it means to be as a natural lawyer is
to mean that ultimately what a person ought to
do is a function of morality and not a
function of law, then a lot of positivists turn
out to be natural lawyers in that way too.
So I've given a confusing answer because it's a
confusing phrase. Um, IN part because it has a
has a kind of long and a very varied
history.
In the book you argue that there are different
sets of norms that constitute what we call the
law. Could you explain that?
Yeah, so I um Uh, I think if the,
the project is ecumenical. What I want to try
and do is explain why people are attracted to
positivism, why people are attracted to what we in
the states call legal realism, why, but then also
why it's important to hold. Onto this idea that
law is a moral practice. And one way of
getting at all this is through analogy I offer
to thinking about the rules in my household. So
I told you about like the rule, you get
to be home by 7 or you got to
text me and tell me that you, um, that
you won't be. Um, SO, you know, I imagine
this conversation, right? Maybe, maybe my family is having
some difficulty and we go and we go to
see a therapist and she says, oh, what are
the rules of your house? Right. And well, there's
lots of things that you might get at, right?
And asking that question. Suppose I say, oh, you
have like the rules of the house is our
younger son has to be in bed by 8:30,
right? And then she might say, well, is he
in bed by 8:30? And I might say, no,
no, it's usually closer to 8:45, 9 o'clock, and
she might respond, well, that isn't really a rule
of the house, is it? Right, so just think
about what's happened in that conversation. Right, when she
first asked for the rules of the house, I
heard her in a certain kind of way, right?
I heard her to be wondering what rules do
you articulate? What what rules do you announce? What
rules do you take yourself to have adopted? Right?
But then it turns out when she, she's observing
a mismatch between that and another set of rules,
right? The rules that we enforce or the rules
that are followed, right? And um, uh, you know,
lawyers are familiar with this contrast, at least in
the states we have this phrase, we talk about
the difference between law on the books and law
in action. Right? So what do we mean? Well,
there's a sign near my house, right, that says
the speed limit on on I-94, the highway, is
uh 70 MPH. Um, uh, BUT everybody that lives
around here knows that you're not gonna get pulled
over by a police officer if you're traveling 71
or 72. No one really starts to worry until
they're driving 75, and even then they think it's
unlikely, it's probably like 77 or 78, where it
becomes a legitimate possibility, right, that you might be
stopped. And so some people look at this and
they say, oh, the real speed limit is 77,
78, right? It's not the law in the books,
it's the law in action. And I think I
understand that thought, right? That, like, you know, oh,
you know, maybe, maybe if you're trying to acculturate
someone around here, you might say to them knowingly,
the real speed limit is 77 miles an hour.
You're giving them useful information that you can drive
up to that speed and nobody's going to bother
you. But here's the thing, suppose you're the unlucky
person, right, who does get pulled over traveling 75.
You can't go to court and say, oh yeah,
but the real speed limit is 77, right? Because
the court's gonna say, well what what number was
on the sign? It was 70, that's the speed
limit, right? So part of what I'm trying to
do is draw attention to the fact that we
talk about what the law is in different ways,
in the same way that we might talk about
the rules of my house in different ways or
to go back to Our earlier conversation, we might
talk about morality in different ways. Sometimes, right, we're
interested in what's been announced or what's been written
down. Sometimes we're interested in what's been enforced and
what I'm trying to remember to remind people of,
we might also be interested in the question, what
are you actually obligated to do. Right, and I
think in court that is the primary question, what
are you actually obligated to do, right? But the
explanation of why I think people are drawn to
positivist pictures or realist pictures is that they um
is that they track, um. These like many useful,
helpful ways of thinking about law, right? If you
live under law, you should want to know what
the police are going to do, even if you
think it's not what they're permitted to do, even
if you think it's not what's written down, you
should want to know what they're going to do,
right? But you should also be interested in what
they're permitted to do, and maybe you should be
interested in, you know, how judges are going to
understand. What their permissions are, even if that's different
from what you think their permissions are. So I
just think it turns out the law, the word
law is very flexible and we really need to
do a better job of paying attention to all
of the ways that we that we use it.
But referring to something you mentioned there, uh, I
mean, what are we obligated to do really? Are
people obligated to obey the law? How do we
approach this question?
Yeah, so this is another one of the, the
huge debates that um that philosophers have uh have
been having about law at least since Plato probably
uh probably before. And what I try and do
in law as a moral practice is just um
frame the issue a little differently than it has
in the past, has has been framed in the
past. So, um. If you have this picture of
law as a separate normative system, and you see
all these rules over here, right? And they've been
created by our social practices, and the question is,
do we have moral obligations to follow those rules?
Right, um, and you know, there's a very famous
article, um, uh, by a philosopher named MBE Smith
called Is there a prima facie Obligation to obey
the Law, where he says the answer is no.
And he works through historically, all the many answers
that have been given from people who wanted to
say yes and he shows quite convincingly, they're they're
pretty bad answers, right? It may be that in
some cases, like you should do what the law
what the law requires because it's independently a good
thing to do, right? Like that's commonly the case,
right? You know, the law says, you know, don't
assault people and assault people, assaulting people is generally
a bad thing to do. So you have Smith
says a specific obligation. Right, but the mere fact
that something's against the law, right, Smith wants to
say doesn't um imply, right, even a prima facie
obligation not to do, uh, not to do what
the law has prohibited. So I think that Smith
is looking in the wrong place for the moral
differences that our legal practices make. I agree with
him, right, that that most of the time, right,
the law can't make something impermissible just by saying
it's impermissible, right? There are There are exceptions, right?
You know, which relate back to some of the
conversations we're having earlier about the, the tasks of
law, right? Sometimes we need to coordinate our conduct,
right? You know, like the street sweepers are coming
through, right? And, you know, somebody needs to tell
us, you know, when to move our cars so
that the streets can be cleaned, right? I think
we're, when Right, and order is serving a kind
of moral function like that, then it turns out
the law can create an obligation just by telling
you what to do, right? But the law makes
other kinds of moral differences, right? So, um, uh,
you know, even when it's telling you not to
do something that you should know not to do.
Um, IT'S, uh, it's making a moral difference. So
in the chapter on the obligation to obey the
law in laws and moral practice, I, um, talk
about this awful case involving, uh, teenagers, um, I
think it was, oh no, I've forgotten the state
already, I think it was in Oklahoma, um, uh,
you know, a teenage boy who, um, uh, who
Well, actually, you know, like, uh maybe because people
aren't expecting this. I, I, I won't describe in
any detail um that uh it was it a
case of sexual assault, and I just won't describe
in any detail what it was, um, that the
boy was accused of doing, but I'll, but I
will say this, right, um, the charges against him
were dismissed for fairly technical reasons because the statute
that he was being prosecuted under. Um, HAD been
drafted in a way that it didn't actually cover
what he had done, even though it was obviously
intended to do so. And almost immediately people, people
were outraged, understandably so, and almost immediately the legislator
amended the statute, right, so that it would going
forward cover what what this teenage boy had done.
And so here's the kind of question you might
ask, like, what changed morally as a result of
as a result of the adoption of that statute?
And I don't think that his primary obligations did.
It was always wrong for him to act the
way he did, right? Um, IT didn't didn't need
the state legislature to tell him that it was
wrong, right? Um, BUT something really important changed, right,
which is that the, the state. Got the power
to hold him to account, right? So, uh, in
criminal law we talked about the principle of legality,
that you can't be punished for something that wasn't
announced as unlawful in advanced, right? Even if it
was immoral, right? And we've got good reasons for
constraining state power this way. So I, I, um.
YOU know, I think when our legal practices are
defective, it's often the case that we're not obligated
to do what people think we're obligated to do.
I also think it's the case that when they're
defective, sometimes we're obligated not to do something that
looks permissible from the law's perspective, right? But that
when we think about what the moral significance of
our legal practices are, sometimes it's creating new relations
of accountability, like with this Oklahoma case that I'm
describing.
In the book, you also talk about the central
worry that people have about linking law and morality.
What is that worry and how should we deal
with it?
Well, so it connects again back to some of
the conversations we've been having so far. I think
one worry, um, I can't remember if I call
this the central worry, but I probably did. The
one worry that, uh, that people have is that
if we see law as part of our moral
lives, we'll lose our ability to criticize law, right?
Um, THIS was, um, you know, a worry expressed
by Hansel. AMONG others, um, that, uh, that we
need to understand law as a social practice and
to recognize that our social practices can be bad
and uh and that will give us this kind
of critical distance so people don't fall into the
habit of hearing the word obligation or duty in
a legal context and thinking that it means they
really should or must do the thing that they're
being told to do. Um, I think, um, this
is sort of like selling people short. Um, WHY?
Well, so first of all, I think that, um,
uh, we criticize, um, aspects of our moral lives
all the time, right? Um, SO, uh, uh, Sophia
Moreau teaches at NYU, um, has a paper that
uh that she's working on about objectionable obligations. Um,
WHICH is really capturing better than I did in
the book, the idea that I'm trying to capture,
right? But sometimes we take ourselves to have genuine
moral obligations and nevertheless think it's objectionable that we
have them. So, uh, to take, um, to take
a um a familiar example, right? Um, IN our
society we tend to um assign uh caregiving responsibilities
to women. Um, DISPROPORTIONATELY, discriminatorily so, and so you
might think in a particular case, right, um, you
might have two thoughts. You might have like, well,
there's somebody here who's dependent, maybe it's a child,
maybe it's an elderly relative. You might think that
this, this mom or this daughter, they really do
owe this person a responsibility. Right, um, they would,
they would wrong the person in their care if
they didn't show up to take them to the
doctor or didn't, um, feed them or what have
you. You might also think it's objectionable that they
have the obligation. Right, that the obligation hasn't been
assigned to someone else, maybe a man, or that
the obligation hasn't been shared, or that the obligation
hasn't been dedicated to an institution or, you know,
to, to free individuals from the burdens of, of
um discharging it themselves. And so, um, so we
can think, oh, there's a genuine obligation here, and
also it's objectionable and we ought to rearrange our
social practices so that people don't have this obligation.
I think law gets us in that situation all
the time. Right, that we have genuine obligations, right?
But we also shouldn't have those obligations or that
we have duties, but we shouldn't have those duties.
And so once you see this feature of morality,
right? And what's the feature? The feature is what
our actual rights and responsibilities are do depend on
our social practices, right? Um, I am responsible for
caring and feeding for my children because of particular
social practices. We could have other social practices, communal
practices of raising children. That would assign that responsibility
differently, right? So, but, but, but my genuine moral
rights and responsibilities do depend on our social practices,
but also our practices might be objectionable, they might
be things that we should reform because they're better
ways of living. I think that's a fairly standard
feature of our moral lives and then it turns
out to be a fairly standard feature of our
legal lives too.
What can all of these teaches about lawyers? What
is exactly the kind of work that lawyers do
and do they have any form of moral expertise?
Yeah, so, um, I think, uh, one of the
claims that people find most startling in the book
is that, um, that, uh, that lawyers, well, first,
lawyers are engaging in moral arguments, right? I think
they're trying to sort out when they go to
court and argue over claims, they're trying to sort
out the moral consequences of our legal practices, who
has what rights and responsibilities in virtue of our
political history. Right? Um, THE second claim, the one
that people find startling that goes along with that
is that I think that lawyers have a kind
of moral expertise, right? Um, IT doesn't mean that
I always think that they're immoral, often they're not,
and I try and account in the last half
of the last chapter for reasons that lawyers behave
immorally. But before that, I want to defend a
kind of moral expertise. What is it consistent? Well,
if our moral rights and responsibilities depend on our
political history, depends on who's made what decisions and
um and how were cases resolved in the past,
then one source of expertise will be knowing what
decisions have been made, knowing how cases have been
decided, or if you don't know that, knowing where
and how to look, right? So, knowing, I, I
put it this way, knowing the morally relevant facts,
that's a kind of moral expertise. Second kind of
moral expertise is, um, you know, like this is
not just, um, uh, any corner of our moral
lives, right? Legal decisions, um, uh, you know, take
place in particular institutions. That are structured in particular
ways that have a recurring set of concerns, right?
So part of what you get when you get
educated as a lawyer is, right? Education into the
concerns in this part of life, for instance, um.
You know, lawyers worry about floodgates problems. If we
recognize a claim for Ricardo, will there be thousands
of claims that will overwhelm our ability to adjudicate
claims? I don't have to worry about that when
my kids assert that they have a right. I've
got 2 children, I've got time, right? I can
listen to both of them make an argument, right?
But a court might have to worry about, you
know, Do we have the capacity to adjudicate these
kinds of claims or slippery slope arguments, right? They,
they'll notice that uh if we take this step,
somebody's gonna ask us to take the next step
and do we know where we're gonna stop? Right?
And so I think like a kind of morally
expertise is that you, um, you, you become accustomed
to, comfortable with, cognizant of. Of the recurring moral
issues, um, I, I, the issues, the moral issues
that recur with these kinds of institutions. So I
think that's another kind of moral expertise, but, but,
you know, let it be said, um, there are
features of the practice that I think push lawyers
sometimes towards having badly, bad moral judgment and, uh,
and I want to highlight those as well.
So one last question slash topic then. Why is
it that sometimes people find lawyers repugnant and what
can we do about their repugnance?
Yeah, so, um, I, uh, I had fun writing
this section of the book. It picks up, it
picks up on, um, a theory that was put
forward by Aaron James, uh, who's a philosopher at
UC Irvine, who wrote a brilliant little book called
Assholes Theory. Um, AND the book is an effort
to figure out, um, just what is an asshole
to take the, take the category seriously, um, as
a moral label, right? What, what, what is this
kind of person? Why do we find them bothersome?
Why do they make us angry? Why are they
hard to deal with? And Aaron has a really
interesting answer, right? He says that an asshole is
someone who claims special privileges out of an entrenched
sense of entitlement that makes them immune to criticism.
And one of the things he does in his
book is he observes that bankers often, uh, often,
uh, are assholes, and he, he sort of plays
around what features of the profession of being a
banker, right, might generate this. Uh, AND it occurred
to me as I was reading this, I was
like, oh, a lot of, a lot of lawyers
have this problem too. A lot of lawyers are
assholes, and I think they're features of the profession
that pull them in that. Direction. And just to
pick up on his definition, the um the sense
of entitlement, right? And I think part of the
sense of entitlement, at least an adversarial legal culture
like America, comes from the idea that you represent
your clients and only your client's interests and you're
supposed to do so zealously. So if I am
being rude or breaking the bounds of polite behavior
or acting like an asshole, I have permission to
do this. Um, BECAUSE my only responsibility is to
my client, it's not to the rest of humanity.
And I think this is actually like a quite
bad construction of what the actual ethical rules are
for lawyers even here in the United States, but
it's certainly the cartoon construction that I think licenses.
A lot of bad behavior. So in that, in
that, in that last phase of the book, I
just try and try and think through if, if,
if I'm right that law is a moral practice,
why aren't lawyers more moral? And I think that,
uh, and I think that James is offering us
part of the picture.
Great. So, the book is again, law is a
moral practice. I'm leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview, and Doctor Hershowitz, so
just before we go apart from the book, where
can people find your work on the internet?
Oh, terrific. So, um, I have a website, just
scott Hershowitz.com. I've got a Twitter and a blue
sky account and uh and I also, um, I,
I, I try to write philosophy for a wide
audience. So I've got a book behind me, Nasty,
Brutish and Short Adventures and Philosophy with Kids, which
is a kind of introduction to philosophy through the
eyes of children, and you'll see occasional essays in
the New York Times or The Atlantic, any place
I can get to give me a platform for
philosophy.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
pleasure to talk.
It was a really great conversation. I appreciate it.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Labraysent and the Samuel Curriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Acosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Heringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbo, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal N Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.